PEP 747: Revised TypeForm specification (#3929)
python/peps: peps/pep-0747.rst

introducing a new special form ``typing.TypeForm``.

This PEP makes no changes to the Python grammar. ``TypeForm`` is
intended to be enforced only by type checkers, not by the Python runtime.

Motivation
==========

A function that operates on type form objects must understand how type
expression details are encoded in these objects. For example, the expressions
``int | str``, ``"int | str"``, ``list[int]``, and ``MyTypeAlias`` are all
valid type expressions, and they evaluate to instances of ``types.UnionType``,
``builtins.str``, ``types.GenericAlias``, and ``typing.TypeAliasType``,
respectively.

There is currently no way to indicate to a type checker that a function accepts
type form objects and knows how to work with them. ``TypeForm`` addresses this
limitation. For example, here is a function that checks whether a value is
assignable to a specified type and returns None if it is not::

   def trycast[T](typx: TypeForm[T], value: object) -> T | None: ...

The use of ``TypeForm`` and the type variable ``T`` describes a relationship
between the type form passed to parameter ``typx`` and the function's
return type.

> ``TypeForm`` can also be used with `TypeIs <https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/narrowing.html#typeis>`__

Reviewer: We were missing a reference at typing.readthedocs.io for this one, I added it in https://github.com/python/typing/pull/1852.

```suggestion
``TypeForm`` can also be used with :ref:`typing:typeis`
```

  ok2: TypeForm[str | None] = str   # OK
  ok3: TypeForm[str | None] = None  # OK
  ok4: TypeForm[str | None] = Literal[None]  # OK
  ok5: TypeForm[str | None] = Optional[str]  # OK
  ok6: TypeForm[str | None] = "str | None"  # OK
  ok7: TypeForm[str | None] = Any  # OK

  err1: TypeForm[str | None] = str | int  # Error
  err2: TypeForm[str | None] = list[str | None]  # Error

By this same definition, ``TypeForm[Any]`` describes a type form object
that represents the type ``Any`` or any type that is assignable to ``Any``.
Since all types in the Python type system are assignable to ``Any``,
``TypeForm[Any]`` describes the set of all type form objects
evaluated from all valid type expressions.

The type expression ``TypeForm``, with no type argument provided, is
equivalent to ``TypeForm[Any]``.

Implicit ``TypeForm`` Evaluation
--------------------------------

When a static type checker encounters an expression that follows all of the
syntactic, semantic and contextual rules for a type expression as detailed
in the typing spec, it should evaluate the *actual type* of this expression
using its normal rules for value expressions, and it should *also* evaluate

> its ``TypeForm`` type.

Reviewer 2: Yes, to me this feels too close to specifying *how* a type checker should implement this feature. We should say what the observable behavior should be, not how type checkers should achieve that behavior.

For example, if a static type checker encounters the expression ``str | None``,
it should evaluate the *actual type* of this expression to be ``UnionType``.
Because this expression is a valid type expression, a type checker should
*also* evaluate its type as ``TypeForm[str | None]``. The resulting type is
assignable to both ``UnionType`` and ``TypeForm``.

When a type checker reports the resulting type (for example, in error messages

> or in response to a ``reveal_type`` call), it may reveal its actual type,

Reviewer 2: What about `assert_type()`?

Reviewer 2: (Never mind, discussed below)

At runtime the ``TypeForm(...)`` callable simply returns the value passed to it.

This explicit syntax serves two purposes. First, it documents the developer's
intent to use the value as a type form object. Second, static type checkers
validate that all rules for type expressions are followed::

  x4 = type(int)  # No error, evaluates to "type[int]"
  
  x5 = TypeForm(type(int))  # Error: call not allowed in type expression

Assignability
-------------

``TypeForm`` has a single type parameter, which is covariant. That means
``TypeForm[B]`` is assignable to ``TypeForm[A]`` if ``B`` is assignable to
``A``::

  def get_type_form() -> TypeForm[int]: ...

  t1: TypeForm[int | str] = get_type_form()  # OK
  t2: TypeForm[str] = get_type_form()  # Error

``type[T]`` is a subtype of ``TypeForm[T]``, which means that ``type[B]`` is
assignable to ``TypeForm[A]`` if ``B`` is assignable to ``A``::

  def get_type() -> type[int]: ...

  t3: TypeForm[int | str] = get_type()  # OK
  t4: TypeForm[str] = get_type()  # Error

``TypeForm`` is a subtype of ``object`` and is assumed to have all of the
attributes and methods of ``object``.

> If a value with a ``TypeForm`` type is used within an ``typing.assert_type``

Reviewer 2: This feels problematic to me; assert_type() on a single expression should succeed only with a single type (or its equivalents).

When a static type checker encounters an expression that follows all of the
syntactic, semantic and contextual rules for a type expression as detailed
in the typing spec, the evaluated type of this expression should be assignable
to ``TypeForm[T]`` if the type it describes is assignable to ``T``.

For example, if a static type checker encounters the expression ``str | None``,
it may normally evaluate its type as ``UnionType`` because it produces a
runtime value that is an instance of ``types.UnionType``. However, because
this expression is a valid type expression, it is also assignable to the

> type ``TypeForm[str | None]``.

Author: Good suggestion. Done.

   def checkcast(typx: TypeForm[UT=Union[*Ts]], value: str) -> Union[*Ts]: ...
   @overload
   def checkcast(typx: type[C], value: str) -> C: ...
   # ... (more)

All functions observed in the wild that conceptually accept type form
objects generally try to support *all* kinds of type expressions, so it
doesn’t seem valuable to enumerate a particular subset.

Additionally, the above syntax isn’t precise enough to fully describe the
input constraints for a typical function in the wild. For example, many
functions do not support type expressions with quoted subexpressions
like ``list['Movie']``.

A second use case for pattern matching is to explicitly match an ``Annotated``
form to extract the interior type argument and strip away any metadata:

::

   def checkcast(
       typx: TypeForm[T] | TypeForm[AT=Annotated[T, *A]],
       value: object
   ) -> T:

However, ``Annotated[T, metadata]`` is already treated equivalent to ``T``
by static type checkers. There’s no additional value in being explicit about
this behavior. The example above could more simply be written as the equivalent:

::

   def checkcast(typx: TypeForm[T], value: object) -> T:

Footnotes
=========

.. [#type_t]

>    `Type[T] <https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/special-types.html#type>`__
>    spells a class object

Reviewer: This one already had a reference, but it wasn't obvious what it was called. To check, go to https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/special-types.html#type and click "Show Source" and we can see:
```rst
.. _`type-brackets`:

``type[]``
----------

Sometimes you want to talk about class objects, in particular class
```

This shows `type-brackets` is the reference name: 

```suggestion
   :ref:`Type[T] <typing:type-brackets>` spells a class object
```

.. [#TypeIs]

>    `TypeIs[T] <https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/narrowing.html#typeis>`__
>    is similar to bool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :ref:`TypeIs[T] <typing:typeis>` is similar to bool
```
